#Systems biology
## Definition
Systems biology is an emerging approach applied to biomedical and biological scientific research. Systems biology is a biology-based inter-disciplinary field of study that focuses on complex interactions within biological systems, using a more holistic perspective (holism instead of the more traditional reductionism) approach to biological and biomedical research. [link][SysBio] 
[SysBio]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_biology

## Aim

+ Biological and biomedical research;
+ Model and discover emergent properties, properties of cells, tissues and organisms functioning as a system;
+ Typically involve metabolic networks or cell signaling networks.

## Characteristics of Systems

+ Emergence(Systems (and subsystems) have properties which their constituent parts do not possess)
+ Hierarchy/Modularity – parts which may themselves be systems
+ Communication – parts can interact
+ Control processes – to ensure continuity
    1. Feedback Control;
    2. Feedforward Control;
    3. For example: Fertilization, In vitro fertilization, spark plugs and other part of auto mobile;
+ Features of complex systems
    1. Nonlinearity;
    2. Can have memory (response history dependent);
    3. No precise boundaries;

## How to study systems biology network

+ Principle 1: Modularity
+ Principle 2: Recurring circuit elements
    + network motif
    + feedforward and bi-fan motif
+ Principle 3: Robustness

## Renew the analysis method of system biology
+ Tier 1: Interactome
 
    + Which molecules talk to each other in networks?
    + Get part of interaction list
    + Static interactome analysis 
        + Protein-protein interaction network, regulation network, Metabolic pathways etc.
        + Limitations: It's a crude network. Time, space, population are average. Only the global feature, just like a _denovo_ draft genome.
        + Analysis methods;
            + Functional Genomics: expression analysis, network integration
            + Graph Theory: scale free, small world etc.
+  Tier 2: Deterministic

    What is the average case behavior?
    

+ Tier 3: Stochastic
 
    What is the variance of the system?


## Summary
Definition, characteristics and study method of systems biology. Finally, some examples.

## Further reading
+ [Systems biology wikipedia][1]
[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_biology



