# Network analysis: definition, characteristics and properties

##  Definition 

A _biological network_ is any network that applies to biological systems. A network is any system with _sub-units_ that are linked into _a whole_, such as species units linked into a whole _food web_. Biological networks provide a _mathematical analysis_ of connections found in _ecological_, _evolutionary_, and _physiological studies_, such as _neural networks_.

## Biology network model

+ Network: A linked list of interconnected nodes.
+ Note: Chemical, miRNA, protein, cell and species etc.
+ Edges: Biological relationships, etc., interactions, regulations, reactions, transformations, activation, inhibitions.
+ network type: social network, informatics network etc.

## Networks in biology

+ Species-species Network
    + Tooth biofilm && Interspecies collaboration
    + S. sanguis is a normal inhabitant of the healthy human mouth, infective endocarditis;
    + P. gingivalis is one of the bacteria that is known to cause gingivitis

+ Protein-protein interaction networks

    + Yeast Protein Interaction Network
+ Gene regulatory networks (DNA-protein interaction networks)

    + GAL gene regulation
    + Expression network 
+ Metabolic networks

    + TCA cycle
+ Signaling networks

    + A Signal Transduction Example: MAPK signal pathway
+ Neuronal network

    
+ Food webs

## Network format

+ Matrix
+ Graph

## Network Comparisons: Properties of Large Networks

+ Global network properties: give an overall view of the network, but might not be detailed enough to capture complex topological characteristics of large networks;
    1. Degree distribution
        + Definition: degree of a node is the number of edges incident to the node.
        + Average degree of a network;
        + Biological network degree distribution: [scale-free][sf] && [power law][pl];
[sf]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale-free_network
[pl]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_law
        + The probability that a new vertex will be connected to vertex i depends on the connectivity of that vertex;
        + Random network degree distribution: [Poisson distribution][ps];
[ps]:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_distribution
        + Degree distribution is not a good way to reflect the network structure.

    2. Average [clustering coefficient][cc]
[cc]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clustering_coefficient
       + Total number of possible connections for an undirected matrix or network: 1/2*k(k-1);
       + Clustering coefficient for a specify node: 
           + Cv = | E(N(v)) |/(max possible number of edges in N(v))
           + Where N(v) the neighborhood of v, i.e., all nodes adjacent to v.
           + Cv can be viewed as the probability that two neighbors of v are connected.
           + For vertex v of degree 0 or 1, by definition Cv=0.
       + Average clustering coefficient(Ca): The average of all the node clustering coefficient: Ca = sum(Cv)/n, n: number of node in the network;
    3. Clustering spectrum
        + Distribution of clustering coefficient of different degree Node.
    4. Average Diameter
        + Distance(Diameter): the distance between two nodes is the smallest number of links that have to be traversed to get from one node to the other;
        + Average network diameter: the average of shortest path lengths over all pairs of nodes in a network;
    5. Spectrum of shortest path lengths
        + Definition: Let S(d) be the percentage of node pairs that are at distance d. The spectrum of shortest path lengths is the distribution of S(d) over d.
        + Graph like power law.
        + Small world
            1. A small average path length;
            2. Any node can be reached within a small number of edges, 4~5 hops.
            
    6. Centrality: Quantifies the topological importance of a node (edge) in a network.
        + Degree centrality Cd: nodes with a large number of neighbors (i.e., edges) have high centrality. Therefore we have Cd(v)=deg(v); # biological important
        + Closeness centrality, Cc(v): nodes with short paths to all other nodes in the network have high closeness centrality;
        + Betweenness centrality, Cb(v): Nodes (or edges) which occur in many of the shortest paths have high betweenness centrality.

+ Local network properties: more detailed network descriptors which usually encompass larger number of constraints, thus reducing degrees of freedom in which the networks being compared can vary.
    + Network motifs
        + Definition: A network motif is a small _over-represented_ partial subgraph of real network;
        + Erdos-Renyi(ER) random graphs: A graph with n nodes, Edges are added between pairs of nodes uniformly at random with same probability p.
        + Application:
            + May provide insight into both the structure and function of the whole network;
            + Networks of similar type share the same motifs;
            + Motifs could reflect the evolutionary processes that generated these network classes;
    + Graphlets
        + Definition: Graphlets are small connected induced non-isomorphic subgraphs of a large network;
        + Graphlet frequencies: count the occurrences of all small (2 to 5 node) graphlets in a network;
        + Relative Graphlet Frequency Distance (RGF-distance);
        + Graphlet Degree Distribution Agreement (GDD-agreement);
+ Biological Networks Properties
    + Power law degree distribution: Rich get richer
    + Small World: A small average path length. Mean shortest node-to-node path
    + Robustness: Resilient and have strong resistance to failure on random attacks and vulnerable to targeted attacks
        + Attack Tolerance;
    + Hierarchical Modularity: A large clustering coefficient, How many of a node’s neighbors are connected to each other
        + PPI network;

## Network topology

+ Definition: Arrangement of elements in network;
+ Direction & Group

## Summary

+ Properties to describe the complex network;
+ Network motif and Graphlet reflect local network;
+ Topology of network;
+ Some network model: EA model, BA model, scale-free network.

## Further reading

+ [scale-free][sf]
+ [power law][pl]
+ [Poisson distribution][ps]
+ [clustering coefficient][cc]
